the category today is how to grow
Revenue faster in the second half of
2023 seems timely that we're entering uh
July Q2 is over
um I have one to two calls every day
with a startup founder and or a like
sales leader or go to market leader
um and one way that I often pick topics
is like what is the most common
conversation that I'm having with folks
uh and so that is how I arrived at
today's topic and just for a context
setting General sentiment from Founders
and go to market leaders we you know get
on these calls that I have I say as I
said on a daily basis how did the first
half of the year go almost universally
it's like well first half of the year
was pretty tough
um you know we we missed the revenue
targets that we projected in like Q4 of
last year where we thought we would
perform in 2023 I think that's probably
more common than not for SAS businesses
in the first half of this year maybe we
re-forecasted our Revenue Target because
of that Miss uh but for the first time I
would say and and certainly like several
months there there is like a bit of
optimism that follows that it was a
tough first half of the year
um and people just like the sentiment is
more positive and at the end of q1 this
this like positive sentiment didn't
exist it was like tough q1 or bracing
for a tough Q2 but now the conversations
are more tough first half of the year
but it seems like there's like light at
the end of the tunnel
um there's some like positive Trends in
the business this we're excited about
you know certain opportunities
um and there are public data points that
are reinforcing the like positive change
in sentiment around public markets that
are rebounding even more so today on a
positive inflation print
um and uh layoffs have slowed I remember
first quarter of this year maybe Q4 of
last year it was like every day uh new
layoff announcement and in turn like at
least in part because of these layoffs
uh burn has come down mostly across the
board and so folks have been able to
extend their Runway and people are just
feeling more positive about the business
than they were in let's call it February
March April uh maybe even May
um and so that sort of uh transcends
into the the number one question that
I'm being asked right now which is what
should we be doing to start growing
faster in the second half of this year
given sort of like positive sentiment
change that is taking place and so
that's where we'll focus uh today's deck
um this is sort of how I approach the
conversation on an individual basis but
on what I'm going to try and do is just
have that that conversation I'm having
one-on-one with a group setting and so
we'll see how that goes um the first
thing that I do is I ask a few questions
about the business itself and
specifically about
um the the go to market strategy or the
go to market funnel and how things are
performing and so we start with things
like how many qualified opportunities
are we creating each month and even at a
very early stage businesses should have
an understanding of how many qualified
opportunities we created in June
um I then ask like okay and and how many
qualified opportunities is that per
sales rep what do our conversion rates
look like how are these things trending
over time do we have an implementation
backlog how long does it take to onboard
a new customer and I just try and get
sort of a high level understanding of
the customer funnel as it just in the
business today and some of the trends
associated with that um and so you know
maybe the takeaway from this slide is
you just want to have sort of a baseline
understanding of how the business is
performing at a very early stage even
and we'll get into why uh in a couple
slides here
um the the next thing that I try and do
is diagnose the bottleneck to closing
more Revenue
um and I'll sort of start this with the
bottleneck in four out of five companies
that I speak with is opportunity
creation it's demand gen
um and this is oftentimes misdiagnosed
as conversion rates and so when I first
asked the question to folks which is
like where what is the largest
opportunity for us to grow faster like
where is the bottleneck is it conversion
rates is it uh uh top of the funnel is
it implementation most folks will sort
of gravitate towards you know like at
the end of Q2 we had a couple of these
big deals that we had been tracking for
much of the quarter and those deals they
didn't convert they pushed and so what
that meant was we weren't able to hit
our Q2 Revenue targets and so you know
gosh like had those couple big deals
converted we would have been in a much
better place and so I would say you know
let's figure out how we could get those
deals to convert next time around or get
those deals to convert faster
um and uh that may be true but the next
thing that I do is push back a little
bit on that and um just try and get an
understanding again of the demand gen
environment in an easy way of doing this
is I say
how many opportunities per AE uh are we
creating on a monthly basis and there
should be a number for that it's easy
math like how many total opportunities
did we create in June how many how many
sales reps do we have like there's your
number of opportunities per sales rep
um another way of doing this that is a
really helpful uh test for me is I pull
up sales reps calendars
um and it's not one size fits all
because Enterprise sales is going to be
very different from transactional sales
but what I like to see is something like
two new demos every day on a sales reps
calendar and what that means is a sales
rep is doing something like four
customer calls every day so if we think
about a sales rep stay there's something
like eight hours in the day we want to
be spending something like three to four
of those hours customer facing and then
of course that leaves us with you know
four or five hours to do non-customer
facing activities follow-ups outbounds
whatever those things may be and
um what I see more often than not is
that that environment doesn't exist
um calendars are relatively empty
um and or the blocks that exist on
calendars are not customer facing
activities they're things like you know
a prospecting block or the gym or
internal meetings and so it's important
to both pull up the calendars and also
see how the time is being spent to
diagnose if we've got a demand gen
problem or if we're actually like
swimming in demand and that isn't the
bottleneck
um if you get to this point where
calendars are packed you're sort of
inundated with demand you then want to
sort of move down the funnel so are the
leads converting
um and if the leads aren't converting
why not is it is it a quality issue with
the demos do we have product Market fit
issues with why the uh these prospects
aren't closing do we need sales training
is it that our sales reps are not
educated enough in the domain to be able
to sell this product that otherwise
would be sort of flying off the shelf so
again we're sort of like trying to
diagnose what the biggest constraint to
growth here is again with the caveat
like more times than not it's demand gen
um and then lastly you know if all of
these things are happening the
bottleneck could be implementation and
onboarding um I referenced uh Jason
referring me companies to Angel invest
in there's there's one that's performing
quite real well right now and I think um
they'd be comfortable with me uh
highlighting this because it's a good
problem to have owner.com uh Jason
introduced me to the company Jason's an
investor their bottleneck is
implementation they have a lot of demand
they have a lot of customers that are
signing up and right now it's just
taking too long to onboard those folks
that are raising their hand and saying I
want this
um and so the sort of like prescription
to fix that is different but before we
get there we've got to really diagnose
what the bottleneck is
um whatever it is again it's likely to
managing figure it out
um the next thing that I do on these
calls is I get an understanding of how
the go to market organization maps to
the customer acquisition funnel so how
many people do you have dedicated to
generating demand and it may be
something like we have a marketing
leader and we have four sdrs okay great
um how many people do we have further
down the funnel um we have 10 AES so one
head of marketing four sdrs ten ten AES
okay great and are the AES outbounding
and if the AES are about outbounding
what percentage of your closed Revenue
do we attribute to AE outbound
um and so then again we're just trying
to sort of like map the existing
resources both by Persona and then also
activity to the acquisition funnel and
we can see where people and focus is
concentrated
um and then you'll you'll sort of like
see the next thing that we we do here
with this information
um is are these people and are is this
Focus being mapped appropriately and so
if we have one uh marketing leader if we
have four sdrs and we have 10 AES and
these 10a's like in theory they're
outbounding but they're not really
generating a bunch of closed Revenue
well like the bottleneck is demand gen
most people and most of people's focus
is further down the funnel
we have sort of a
resource attribution or allocation issue
on our hands
um and again like this is true with most
companies that I talk to
um and so the next thing that we want to
do is we want to right size and refocus
the go to market organization based on
the bottleneck if the bottleneck is
demand gen which most the time it is we
really want to have all hands on deck
applying pressure to this bottleneck and
so what that means is if we have a bunch
of AES that are sort of waiting around
for demos to fall on their calendar like
Mana from Heaven uh we need to change
that
um and the way that we change that is we
either shrink the AE team or we have the
AE resources go towards demand gen
acquiring their own customers now
um as companies get larger the louder
thing that I just described is harder to
do
um this sort of like culture of outbound
where AES generate their own demand and
ultimately Source their own Revenue it
sort of becomes ingrained in the culture
and I have seen companies really
struggle with making this shift and so
if you have a mature sales organization
that historically has not done much
outbound has not generated much demand
and revenue on their own it's it's hard
to to change that um and it's a muscle
that like maybe hasn't been worked in a
long time for these sales folks and so
what you may find is the right decision
is actually sort of like shifting
resources around it may mean you have
too many AES and I see this as a
hangover for a lot of companies where we
sort of staffed up in 2022 we hired a
bunch of AES when money was was easier
and uh we thought that we're going to
have a bunch of demand and now we have
like these leftover AES
um but you know they aren't closing as
much revenue and the reality that I
think a lot of people miss and it's
counterintuitive more sales people does
not mean more sales and when you're in a
demand constrained environment if you
have let's let's just use this 10 AE
example to to like further further this
along um the line so uh if you have 10
AES
um and your demand constrained meaning
eje is getting let's call it a few
opportunities each week what you're
doing is you're spreading the limited
demand that you do have across 10 people
and there's going to be performance
variants across those 10 people and so
if you shrink the team to let's call it
seven
um you know like very plain speaker like
you fire the three worst performers on
the team
um you have just taken the sort of
conversion rates on the opportunities
that were going to the three worst
performers
um those demos now have a higher
likelihood of inverting because they're
going to sales people that have a higher
chance of converting them and so in this
scenario it's actually sort of like
addition by subtraction you will close
more Revenue with fewer sales people
when you are in an environment that is
demand constrained and
um this is a conclusion that I'm coming
to with a lot of companies it's it's
certainly not one size fits all again
just sort of like go back and do this
test for your specific environment
um but a lot of folks like there is a
mismapping of people and focus based off
of this bottleneck that I described and
so that is
um how I sort of start to get to the
outcome of generating more Revenue in
the second half of this year is a sort
of diagnosing the bottleneck applying
pressure on that bottleneck
um as much as we possibly can until it
moves somewhere else now
um we can in the question and answer
period if there are folks that are in
the uh uh sort of pleasant environment
of the bottleneck not being demand we
can we can get into Solutions around how
to fix those things but as I mentioned
four out of five companies bottleneck is
demand let's talk about some things that
I recommend to uh help remove that
bottleneck Beyond just the sort of
appropriate mapping of resources
um the first one that I think uh folks
oftentimes Miss and I certainly have
um is to leverage your happy customers
um there's an example that that I'll
give here a company that I'm I'm on the
board of that uh Founders fund a large
investor I'm close with Parker from
zenefits um Rippling does a really
clever way of doing this that uh I like
so they onboard new employees through
their software thousands of times a day
when one of their customers hires
someone and what they do is they give an
NPS survey at the end of that onboarding
so when I joined Founders fund I
onboarded to Rippling
um and uh The NPS survey I Market
whatever I Market based off of my
experience onboarding I probably marked
it to 10. and then I would receive an
email if I Market nine or ten offering
me I think they give like a 25 gift card
that if you post on LinkedIn about your
experience onboarding with Rippling
we'll send you a 25 gift card to all the
nines and tens and so then on LinkedIn
when I I go search for like hashtag
Rippling hashtag sponsored I can't
remember I think that's the way that
they
um figure out who's doing it they're
like countless posts from people that
have onboarded to this product and it's
free I mean I was about to say free
marketing it's 25 marketing um like and
it's marketing from what is at least in
theory this like impartial third party
versus a paid ad on uh LinkedIn and I
thought that was just a really clever
and effective way of doing it and many
of these posts have like dozens if not
hundreds of likes
um about people sort of raving about
their onboarding experience with
Rippling
um the next thing as it pertains to
leveraging your happy customers reward
the right behavior
um if you see someone post on Twitter
LinkedIn whatever something positive
about your company
um send them something like send them a
handwritten thank you note and whatever
you think is like a cool thing that they
would appreciate
um some let's call like a gift and just
like positively reinforce the behavior
that they have gone out of their way to
do to help your business and when you do
that
um it will likely generate more of that
type of behavior
um and then uh another example would be
like if somebody refers you a customer
uh maybe you don't have a formal
referral program in place but one of
your happy customers told you know one
of their friends or colleagues that they
should check you out
um send them a thank you for that like
hand like either hand write a note or
get a handwritten note um done for you
in an automated way and send them a
bottle of champagne or like something
that you know that they like whatever it
might be
um and then lastly one thing that um
let's see I'll try and time box this to
maybe uh 10 minutes we leave 25 minutes
for questions uh one thing that I
recognized at brex
um and this happens organically
the focus of the business when you first
start from a go to market standpoint is
on customer acquisition because you
don't have any customers
um and so you hire folks for demand gen
you hire folks for closing customers in
the form of sales people and over time
you start closing a bunch of customers
in your customer base grows and one day
I was looking at a report that was
relevant to a meeting that I was in and
um we could sort of cheat at brex in
that we could see the payments that were
flowing to other cards we linked to
folks Bank bank accounts and we could
see how much they were paying us and we
could see how much they were paying
American Express and
um I saw one of my friends that works at
a company that uh I I had recently
closed they were still paying American
Express a hundred thousand dollars a
month and I texted him and I said uh hey
I still see you have a hundred thousand
dollar
um Amex bill or you're paying a hundred
thousand dollars to Amex like any reason
you're keeping that on AMX and not
moving into Rex and 30 seconds later I
had an email in my inbox to it to me and
his CFO and was like hey uh CFO uh Sam
flag do we have a hundred thousand
dollars going to Amex it's probably like
some Legacy subscription can you move it
over to brex and they did
um and a hundred thousand dollar card
spend if we have 265 basis points of
interchange that's let's just call it
twenty five hundred dollars a month in
Revenue that's thirty thousand dollars
of top line revenue that took like you
know a 30 second text message to move
over and what I realized at that moment
in time is we had a real missed
opportunity on expanding Revenue within
our customer base and so this goes back
to sort of like mapping resources
appropriately what we did was we took um
one sales rep and this was was when we
were something like eight folks on the
sales team and we moved him or her to
being dedicated to expansion in the base
and he looked at you know these reports
exactly as I just described where is
their sort of an upsell or expansion
opportunity and he would reach out to
folks and I think it was a he and um he
was just closing more Revenue than the
new customer acquisition folks
um and so we knew that that was a sign
that we were under resourced in focusing
on expansion and upsell
um and that oftentimes happens sort of
organically as I described it where you
start a business you're hyper focused on
new logo acquisition but you start
building this base of customers and over
time there might be a real Revenue
opportunity that exists within the base
that you are sort of underserving
um okay back to very top of the funnel
and ways to uh generate demand
um don't be conventional uh this is like
a broad category don't be conventional
get creative
um here is an outbound example for what
I mean by that
um most Folks by Zoom info and Outreach
and uh you know Salesforce or uh
whatever the systems are they uh go to
LinkedIn and they add accounts to
Salesforce and then they use zoom info
to get the contact information and then
they put them in like a 10 email
sequence in Outreach and the response
rates are like you know point eight
percent or something outrageous and like
you know maybe it'll it like eventually
works but it's few and far between and
like you know a lot of wasted effort
um along the way uh the first outbound
campaign that we did at brex was we
bought 300 bottles of Viv clicko
champagne so those were like 40 bucks
each good enough champagne that people
are going to break excuse me good enough
champagne that people are going to drink
it not expensive enough that it's going
to like break the bank we're not sending
bottles of Cristal or whatever I think
the entire campaign cost us something
like twenty thousand dollars we sent the
300 bottles to
um early stage Tech Founders who had
raised money in the last six months
handwritten note that was sort of
automated through a handwritten note
service and it said something like uh
congratulations on your recent fundraise
we're uh you know an early stage startup
uh and know like how hard it is to build
a business we're cheering for you uh
Enrique who's our CEO
um and then we would follow up with an
email to uh see if they would be open to
taking a demo it would be from Enrique
and it would say hey just wanted to see
if you got the bottle that I sent you I
hope you enjoy it with the team
wondering if you'd be open to checking
out Rex and the the stats on this were
like off the charts it was like 7 35
percent
champagne to demo conversion rate and
then like 75 demo to close rate
um now like brex is brexit is like free
in a way
um we made we made money on interchange
and so 75 conversion rate is extremely
high we weren't asking for a check
um and I guess my point in saying that
is I wouldn't necessarily expect that 75
conversion rate from demo to close to
apply to other businesses just because
the barriers to closing deals at brex
were lower
um but and by the way I'm also not
saying don't go send everybody bottles
of champagne well like this is more just
an illustration of the primary point
which is don't be conventional think
outside the box get creative um and so
that is an outbound example that was
really effective for us at Rex
um the next one I'll talk about is
events most people buy a booth they uh
send their best sales reps they show up
with like some tchotchkes and they
raffle an iPad if we scan your badge
like in you know we pull your number or
whatever from the Fishbowl you get an
iPad at the end of the conference um and
so then you get like a bunch of people
stopping by the booth a bunch of random
badges that are scanned that have
nothing to do with buying your product
uh and you come away from that event and
you're sort of like gosh like we scanned
a lot of badges but we didn't see much
revenue from it and
um that is like what most people do uh
brex did things very differently
um we we definitely did buy the booth
and you you sort of need to have a
physical Presence at the event um saster
was our best performing event
um so I encourage folks to to uh take
advantage of this with the annual but we
didn't just buy the booth we did a bunch
of sort of ancillary uh uh supporting
activities that made our sponsorship far
more effective we sponsored the hotel
key cards so that anytime anybody
checked into the hotel that was
associated with saster their whom he was
a brex credit card and so they were just
like constantly looking at a brex credit
card because they would go in and out of
their room multiple times a day
um we had taskrabbits standing outside
the event handing out breakfast burritos
uh so there was like an immediate
branding opportunity for us we bought
the Billboards around the event uh and
so as you were walking to the event you
saw brex branding and at our booth we
had this magician who Incorporated brex
brex's value prop into his magic tricks
and so whenever I looked at the expo
hall brex's Booth would be like packed
with people watching this magic show and
all the other booze would be empty and
we would probably give away like you
know a handful of 25 gift cards at the
end of the magic show or whatever else
and then we would have sales reps that
were scouting the crowd and seeing who
is our Target buyer are there Founders
that are watching this magic show are
there or CFOs that are watching this
magic show and if yes like I'm gonna go
talk to those people and sell to them
um and so we like were unconventional
with our approach to sponsoring events I
guess is the uh I would say long story
short but it was sort of a long story
um and then uh the last example here on
this like don't be uh conventional get
creative
um
2018 when brex launched most startups
we're spending a lot of money online
online advertising LinkedIn Google uh
Wherever You See online ads and we
wanted to be contrarian or different and
we wanted to go offline and so what we
ended up doing was we bought a bunch of
billboards we had a geographically
concentrated target market that was Tech
startups
um and most of the startups were in San
Francisco and so we bought a bunch of
billboards in San Francisco
um that was really effective and it was
also really helpful with our outbound
because when we sent an outbound email
to somebody whose headquarters was in
downtown San Francisco the probability
of them replying was significantly
greater because they had seen our
Billboards everywhere
um and so that's sort of like a brand
Tailwind effect that that campaign had
on outbound
um the runner-up because I've used a
bunch of these examples in the past
probably at a bunch of saster talks um
the runner-up for this was actually
coffee stands so what we considered
doing was uh we were going to put a
bunch of like high-end coffee stands
downtown San Francisco and if you've
ever been to downtown San Francisco
maybe before 2020 you would see like a
bunch of um carts they're they're like
carts that would do lunch and coffee and
whatever else and they were sort of like
you know Day cards that would probably
show up in the morning and they'd be
gone uh by five o'clock in the afternoon
or whatever and so we were gonna get a
bunch of brex branded
um coffee stations like high-end
espresso machines make lattes like
whatever people like to drink in the
morning and
um if you weren't a brex card holder you
paid for it
um like any other place but if you
showed your brex card with your name on
it and your ID or something like that so
we made sure that the uh name would
match the ID you you got free coffee
every day and it would be like a major
perk for employees that had uh uh
company issued brex cards they got free
coffee every day and like good coffee
like you know espresso machine legit uh
stuff and so
um those are sort of like the
um
non-conventional examples that come to
mind when most folks were buying Google
ads we were buying Billboards and
thinking about doing coffee stands
outside of our customers offices now
like don't do the coffee stand example
come up with whatever is sort of like
best for your business or on brand uh do
you know late night whiteboard session
where everybody comes with three ideas
on unconventional customer acquisition
tactics and maybe vote on the best ones
and and do those uh but that's where we
landed with brex
um and then the last thing that I have
and then we can open it up to questions
uh for most companies AES really should
be sourcing their own Revenue there's
almost never going to be this perfect
equilibrium where you have exactly the
number of demos and opportunities that
you're working didn't mean that as an AE
you're filling eight hours a day and
maybe in like you know boom times that
equilibrium exists and maybe even you're
more busy then you don't have enough
hours in the day but um there's like an
ebb and flow here and um many times uh
you don't have a full eight hours of uh
work to to be doing as an AE and I would
argue the second highest Roi thing you
can be doing besides customer facing
closing customers working opportunities
is sourcing more opportunities
generating your own revenue and so I
like to instill it's sort of in early
stages an early stage if possible that
AES should be sourcing their own Revenue
um if they're not uh and they're not
hitting quota you have too many AES
um you should be spreading around the
limited opportunities that you do have
to the highest performing AES and you
will close more Revenue